---
layout: post
title: "Microbial chemicals in early onset ulcerative colitis"  
date:   2025-11-27 03:00:30 +0100
author: "Martin Stražar"
categories: immunity mucosa spatial_transcriptomics 16S mouse_microbiome germ_free
---

Since the widespread use of antibiotics almost a century ago, acute bacterial
infections have largely been largely superseeded by chronic inflammation as a
prominent cause of morbidity and mortality. Ulcerative colitis is a form of
inflammation of the lower intestine, which may ultimately lead to colon
cancers. 

The prevalence of these conditions in Western and Westernized population
attributes disease risk to a mesh of genetic predispositions, enviroment or diet. 
While the exact triggers are still unknown, and may not be unique, gut bacteria are
though to be primary suspects in these case. 

To get an early snapshot of the scene, we examined pediatric UC patients, aged
4-17. These subjects have not undergone treatment, promising a less obstructed
window into onset of inflammation. Through investigation of paired stool and
plasma, we got a window into bacterial communities and their chemical
repertoire that characterizes ulcerative colitis at its earliest stages.




Veillonella


Dipeptides, bits and pieces of proteins, which are suspected to be a result of
bacteria starting to <a href="https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35087228/">
gobble up the host proteins</a>.

Translocation of bacteria from the oral cavity
Important what mediates survival - nitrate respiration (NO3-)


Meddle with
thiopurines oral immunomodulatory drugs 


If microbiota is indeed the trigger of interest phage therapy that targets
individual, <a href="https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35931020/">disease
associated microbes</a>.



---





Snowball
Thriving.

* UC: inflammation of the colon
Newly diagnosed

Highlights:


* Different disease stages, incl. treatment

* Microbial species in IBD severity. 
	Moderate/severe, mild, inactive.
		respiration through sulfate or nitrate as electron acceptors
	Oral translocation ***
	bacteria typical for the oral cavities
* Chemical repertoire in stool/plasma
	Metabolic diversity. **
	Polyamines, biofilm formation, color cancer
	Dipeptides. Trp metabolism. AhR receptor.
	Purines,

* Culturomics *** 
	* Conditions mimicking inflammation, nitrate, lactate. 
		Together they mimick profiles in inflammation best. 
		lactate, Veillonella’s preferred carbon source
	* Alignment between metabolic profiles.
		Lipids signal strongest (disruption of cell membranes), endocannabinoid receptors.
* metabolizes immunosuppressive thiopurine

purines can be dietary or parts of nucleic acids

drugs through xdhA xanthine dehydrogenase
 nitrate signals this modality

6-mercaptopurine
azathioprine

CB1 receptor
	GPCR
	expressed in brain and periphery
	antagonists can ameliorate inflammation
	calcium channels, PKA, PKC

peripheral CB1 signalling on exercise was mediated by dopamine 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-05525-z

Veillonella enriched in exercise (Kostic).





Why is nitrate enriched? Low-oxygen, "hypoxia".
Lactate.
	" emergence of new electron acceptors that enable anaerobic respiration."


Fermentation is a non-membrane chemical breakdown of sugars (from pyruvate, which comes from glycolysis) to produce a tiny amount of ATP. 

Mammalian cells start to behave more like yeasts.
Bacteria then find other ways to survive in low-oxygen environments.
O2, nitrate, sulfate, CO2, fumarate.

Inflammation reduces glycolysis.
Hypoxia can induce inflammation
Oxygen gradients through the intestine that induce inflammation.
Lipids, endocannabinoid receptors. 






This work was featured as a cover in <a href="https://www.cell.com/cell-host-microbe/abstract/S1931-3128(23)00508-5">Cell Host & Microbe</a>.






Reference-free metagenomic assemblies and analysis of primary metabolism pathways revealed an enrichment of nitrate-utilizing operon present in characteristic Gram negative bacteria: E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Veillonella parvula. The latter is an abundant representative of oral microbiota, whose nitrate- and lactate-utilizing capabilities were characterized previously in our lab (PMID 36138166). Veillonella primary metabolism thus makes it very amenable to survival in the inflamed gut, characterized by increased host-derived nitrate (PMID 23393266), likely hypoxia (PMID 21323543) and increase of lactate due to preference for fermentation over aerobic respiration. Indeed, Vellonella thrive in presence of lactic acid bacteria or in exercise-elevated lactate environments (PMID 31235964). In addition, Veillonella showed a significant overabundance in patients that required collectomy (PMID 38215740).

Host metabolomic profiles in moderate/severe disease showed a marked increase in polyamines (which support biofilm formation), arachidonic acid, fatty acid amines and lysophopshocholines (including platelet-activating factor, PAF) and tryptophan metabolites. To estimate bacterial contributions to disease-associated metabolism, we cultured Veillonella parvula SKV38 and Veillonella Sp. HPA0037 in lactate- or nitrate-supplemented media. Indeed, supplementation of both compounds resulted in bacterial supernatants most similar to disease-associated profiles. One of the most prominent metabolites in lactate supplemented cultures was indolelactate, a tryptophan metabolite enriched in stool samples of moderate/severe disease. This metabolite can be produced by lactate dehydrogenase in bacteria and contributes to infant immune development through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling (PMID 34675385). While Bifidobacteria produce it by indolepyruvate as a substrate, the source and role of this metabolite in ulcerative colitis warrants further investigation.

